The Joe Rogan experience. Um, but so, so Josh is now,
um, hosting a podcast called junk science.
Well, we started talking about at the beginning,
then I made you stop and redirect it. So let's come back to it.
So explain like what, what is the junk science? What,
what are the issues with wrongful convictions and junk science?
So.
The all various disciplines of forensic science are
used to convict people. And in fact, wrongfully convicted people,
polygon does a polygraph work. Polygraph is not admissible. It's not so no,
it doesn't work. It's not reliable. Is.
It because you could beat it? If you're a psychopath.
Beat it, there's all different factors that cause your blood pressure to rise.
You know, you may just have a high blood pressure. You may,
your heart may beat faster and you get anxious in different situations.
So it just doesn't work. Um, and it's not admissible in any courts,
but I'm talking about things that you would probably think it just based on pop
media, even if you're very well-read, which you are, you would say, oh,
well that's reliable, like bite mark evidence, right?
It's complete junk sign. So the national academy of sciences is a, um,
the gold standard.
It's got the finest scientists in the country that did a review of
all of the forensic disciplines that are used in courts and found that
with the exception of DNA, all of these are fraught with problems,
bite mark evidence, blood spatter,
arson coercion in chorus confession.
So what the podcast does is it examines all of these from episode by
episode,
it examines all of these forensic disciplines and it goes through to explain
how and why a they're total and B
they are in the face of it being total,
still accepted.
Now like the fact that you got emotional made me want to hug you
because it was like, I, you know, it's like,
it takes a special person to be able to get there on that level.
But now I want to try to make you angry because I think it it's,
it's the anger that should drive people to.
Take back tape about this. Yeah.
Take the bit about all this bite mark evidence for.
Bite mark. We'll give you an example. I have crooked teeth like the bottom.
My bottom teeth are crooked. If I bite into a mouthpiece,
like if I get a mouthpiece form, you can clearly see,
I could see that it's my teeth.
You want to know the debt.
You want to know the difference between a mouthpiece and human skin,
everything humans,
your skin is different than my skin in thickness and
consistency. If you're flexing, when I bite you,
if it's during a struggle or not,
and you have to follow the science and what the science tells us is that bite
marks on human skin are not only unreliable,
but there has been study after study that the so-called experts that they call
otologist. Can't tell the difference between a bite mark and an insect bite.
They can't even agree. They were all shown. The self-professed finest.
Otologist in the country are all shown pictures of marks on
human skin. They can't even agree as a threshold matter. What's a bite mark.
And what isn't is that.
A that's a medical term odontology.
So otologist is as a forensic Denton dentists that
fancies themself an expert in bite marks, but it's. Not only is it,
but the origin story of all these forensic sciences sciences,
you end up down a rabbit hole to some
up story. That sounds like a wacky religion take bite marks. For instance,
there's a guy named George Burroughs is a Reverend in the late 1690s.
He's accused of torturing young girls. Okay.
And one of the forms of torture is biting them and
he's tried and convicted and they take them around the courtroom and pull
his mouth open. And they point to the crookedness of his teeth,
the ridges in his molars,
and they compare it to the bite mark and he's hanged publicly.
And he cites the Lord's prayer at his hanging. And you know,
everybody in the crowd was like, that's kind of up because
witches aren't supposed to be able to cite the Lord's prayer
because this was a trial during the Salem witch trials.
He's the first, um, posthumous, um,
exoneration I'm aware of 20 years after this.
They ended up finding out that George Burroughs was in a different town
altogether. Not only didn't bite these people,
but that the marks weren't even bites as a part of the seal and the Salem witch
trials. And they put, they paused humorously, exonerate him.
The colony of Massachusetts pays his family compensation.
So watch this in the 1970s,
there's a guy named Walter Marx that is accused of biting a victim in a murder.
And the court in that case says, you know what?
There is no established science here. It can't be replicated,
but bite marks are associated with, you know,
identifying accident, victims, burn victims, and admits it.
And it gets admitted into evidence. The appellate court says, well, if the,
if the judge found it credible, who are we to overturn it?
And so Joe watched this, it now infects,
and it's probably an unpopular analogy to use now,
but it spreads across the criminal justice system. Like a virus.
Every court just starts citing this Mark's case.
And judges just start admitting it.
The national academy of forensic scientists found that there's no way to
replicate it. That it's unreliable that the there's this
crackpot named west,
who is an otologist that claimed to use 3d pictures and
ultra violet. He said they set them up. They sent him,
um, you know, uh,
bite marks and the mold of the teeth from someone other than the
defendant and said, we think this is the defendant.
Can you match it to this bite mark? And he said, yes,
they had sent him the bite mark of someone other than the defendant. I mean,
it is that it is that bad of a junk science.
So what we're hoping to do is through the podcast to
educate people because it you're right.
It is how do you overhaul a system? It's a monster.
And one of the ways that you can overhaul the system is, you know,
everybody says, how do you, they ask me a lot? How do I get out of jury service?
And I say, you know what?
You should want to be there because God forbid you were accused of something you
didn't do. Wouldn't you want you on your jury.
So one of the ways we want to do it is to get people thinking, you know what?
I can make a difference here because there's no presumption of innocence. We,
we throw that around. Like it exists. It doesn't exist.
There have been studies done. My firm has done one where, well,
over 90% of people feel like if you've been accused of a crime,
um, you probably did it. Look, I represented how I met Lennox.
I represented Lennox in a case, Lennox Lewis. We should tell people, oh, okay.
So I managed Lennox Lewis and I represented him.
How I met him was I represented him in a case. And, um,
it's an interesting, most people say to me, when I say that, what did he do?
Right. Of course, instead of what, what was he accused.
Of? He actually wasn't accused.
Of anything.
Lennox was suing a boxing manager and a promoter from ripping him off and for
stealing from him. Um,
but if you ask people during jury selection,
how many of you in a criminal case? And when I was, you know,
a lot of jurors were asking, well, what did he do? He didn't do anything.
But if you asked jurors in a criminal case, if a judge will let you ask it,
what you should be able to ask, how many of you think my client,
he was arrested, indicted, must've done something wrong. All hands,
go flying up and down. You know, it should be a basis to get rid of people.
That's not the presumption meniscus. That's the assumption of guilt.
It doesn't exist in this country and it takes more people to be conscientious.
And one of the things that we're trying to do on the podcast is educate them
about these junk sciences, so that if you're ever on a jury and you hear well,
the trajectory of the blood mark on the wall shows you that the person must have
grabbed the knife from this angle. It's total. Okay. One more time.
What's the name of the podcast? The name of the is wrongful conviction,
junk science. Okay.
So that blood splatter,
I'd watched a whole thing online about how w how these people
figure out like how someone must've hit him this way.
And I've seen it in movies. That's all. Total.
So the second episode of the podcast,
I have a guest by the name of Pamela Colloff, who's an award winning writer.
She just won every award.
You could win for writing an article about, uh,
an informant in a case of mine. And I got to know her,
and she wrote an amazing investigative piece about blood spatter,
evidence for public or Texas monthly, or the New York times. One of those three,
I should know. And she went under cover deep,
and she became a certified blood spatter analyst.
As part of her research.
This is a discipline that was born in the basement of some
whack job up in New York.
He called it the national forensic laboratory or some like that.
And it was his basement in his house. And he would do things like,
like recreate crimes by like, you know,
hitting cadavers and watching the blood spatter and, and just like,
think about it. There's so many things wrong with that.
The way the blood travels out of the body from a static,
um, you know, a static body versus one where blood is slow,
is circulating already changes it. The temperature of the blood is different.
If you're struggling and I hit you with a blunt force object, a hammer,
a bat, and your arm is coming up this way. Depends on the speed.
Your arm is traveling. It is total and utter, but it's admissible,
it's admissible.
As his bite mark evidence, even though in all 50 states, um,
as is even though the, the highest court in Texas, um,
faced in work at the innocence project. I mean the highest authority in Texas,
uh, strongly admonished the courts, not to consider blood, uh,
to consider bite mark evidence,
but they still do in spite of the fact that there's case after case,
that proves that these guys who make themselves out to be these experts don't
know anything about what they're talking about. I mean, it's, it's,
we should all be embarrassed and ashamed that this is allowed to go
on in our courts. And you think about it,
Joe forensic odontology was created as a practice,
so that if there's a disaster, if there's a plane crash, right,
and bodies are obliterated,
they can take a full set of teeth and they can compare it to your dental
records.
Now you take the idea that someone's going to bite an imperfect surface, right?
Like a finger or, or, you know, your neck or whatever it is. Right.
And now you're going to go with a couple of teeth on an imperfect surface days
or weeks later, and you're going to go, this must be Joe's teeth.
Cause sometimes I don't really know if you have teeth or not. Joe.
Check this out in the national academy of sciences report, they were a,
they did a study and they cite to it in the report and you can get it it's.
They did a study where they would have people with no teeth,
bite human skin and the people with no missing their two front
teeth. The bite mark appears as if they have two front teeth,
people that have two front teeth can bite down.
And if their incisors are too long,
it can make it appear that they're missing two front teeth. So it's just,
you know, as far as blood spatter is concerned, there is a case.
I think it's the Peterson case that my friend David Rudolph did know the
staircase that show on Netflix.
Where the guy was, the guy was accused.
Of pushing downstairs. I think it was in this case, um,
where they were trying to recreate the blood spatter analysts were trying
to recreate the spatter in the staircase and there's video of them doing it.
And they keep on hitting this, um,
this receptacle full of blood and they can't recreate it and they keep on
doing it and doing it. And finally on the whatever 15th try,
they get it and they all start celebrating and high-fiving,
you're supposed to be able to replicate this. And the reason why DNA,
um, is,
is so reliable is that it's going to be the
same every time it is, um, the gold standard.
Now there are ways to manipulate it.
There are certain people out there that are trying to with it right now. Um,
you know, like for instance,
there's this guy who runs this computer algorithm and
he claims to be able to take a mixture of a bunch of different people's DNA and
untangle it, right. And basically be able to say whose DNA is what,
and, you know,
he won't give the source code for his data
and you know, this shouldn't be a black box. So there's,
there's some things going on like that. But for the most part,
when it's done correctly and the right standards are applied,
you can bet on DNA. But a lot of these pattern matching disciplines,
blood spatter fingerprints, in some instances, um,
bite mark evidence, you know, and what are the other ones, um,
tread, tracking on choose.
Arson, arson.
Arson side, when they can figure out like where a fire was started.
I always wondered about that. So.
Our, oh, sorry to interrupt you please. Uh, so arson, I thought you were done.
Arson science is not science whatsoever. Arson. Uh,
you can become a licensed arson investigator with a 40 hour correspondence.
Course. I know it sounds like a joke, but it's true.
Same thing with blood spatter. It's a 40 hour course at the end of the week,
you can go into any court in the country, in San well, blood bad. Right? I.
Was wonder because I would see a house burnt to the ground. Then they would say,
oh, they determined it was started by a fire.
And this is how they determined it. And I'm like, but everything's burnt out.
Like, how do you know? There are countless.
People serving hard time, um, in, in prisons in America, um, Joanne parks,
I'm Christine bunch who I just interviewed on my product as she brought me to
tears who was convicted of setting a fire. I mean her, her case in Indiana,
how insane is this jail? We're about to release this episode,
but she was a 21 year old mother of a three-year-old boy and her trailer caught
fire. She was asleep. She woke up, she couldn't get into the son's room.
It was to, the fire was too out of control already. And the little boy died.
And the fact is that she, they, they went,
they arrested her six days later in charge of with arson and murder.
And the prosecutor said to the jury, w we admit, we don't have a motive.
We don't have a motive. She was a loving mother with no mental issues with no,
I asked her, do you have any other history of the law enforcement? She goes,
yeah. Once I got a warning for going five miles an hour over the speed limit.
And she, everybody said she was a doting, loving mother.
She was working and going to school and she lost everything. She owned.
She didn't have insurance. She didn't have a shirt to wear at the end of this.
Right. Because she was in her pajamas. It's like, w I mean,
and it was an electrical fire was proved 17 years later by actual X.
Use as the arson evidence against her in the case.
Claim that there was a certain type of accelerant, which there wasn't, um,
they withheld evidence that there was a kerosene that had been, uh,
present in the house from previous, uh, owners who had,
who had come forward and said that there was, you know, and that there was, you.
Know, there was a lot just decided that she was guilty and they were going to.
Try to win. And they,
and that's the sick thing about it is that these arson cases, there is no,
there was no crime. There was a tragedy, but no crime, nobody.
How long had she went away for, she was in for 17 years.
And she's such a beautiful human. I mean, you would, you would meet her even,
and you just want to hug her.
She's just a magnificent human who in prison did most
phenomenal things. And now she's helping others. She has an organization.
Maybe you could look it up. Jamie. She has a wonderful organization.
I'd like to shout out. Um, and she's making a real difference. And she,
I think helped pass a compensation statute in.
Sorry, I didn't mean to step on your words.
I was just going to say that what happens with a lot of these forensic sciences
is they work. They reverse engineer an outcome,
so they decide that the person did it. And there's all this,
this confirmation bias. I know that I've heard you talk about it.
You're familiar with it. You know, you know, the desired outcome.
So you confirm that bias. So, you know,
they then start looking at a streak from
a smoke stain on the wall.
And knowing that the theory is that there was a match
struck and placed against the wall, right?
They will say, well, that's why you see it.
The pattern that you do have that stain on the wall of smoke,
where the reality is is that there are a lot of different explanations for how
something can look.
The scientific analysis of ch of charred remains not remains of people,
but remains of different things, compounds and things.
And if you're working to reverse engineer an outcome, you know, it's,
and it's easy to make this stuff sound reliable,
because if you don't have experience with it, I mean, look, this is a big,
I hadn't done any bite mark cases and all of my cases. So I,
I actually tried to approach it with an open mind. Um,
I'm literally stunned at what I'm finding out, doing research for the episodes,
because it sounds like some wacky religion, you know,
that somebody invented in their house and people buy.
It.
So it's all this stuff still in use because no one has
exposed the fact that it's all junk science or is it because it's established
as a part of what they accept in trials.
And they just haven't made the corrections yet, because if they did,
then they would have to accept the fact that all these other convictions that
were based on this junk science would be open to re-interpretation.
In the trailer for junk science. Josh addresses exactly that.
And he does it very eloquently, which is that along with Chris Fabricant,
who is a strategic litigation director at the innocence project, um,
it was actually a post I created in honor of my dad. Who's not with us anymore.
Um, well I helped to create, I should say, and he does an incredible job,
but basically they keep using it because the precedent is there, right.
Once it's, uh, Josh talks about this and maybe we could even play the trailer,
but I'm sure he talked, play the trailer. Yeah. Can we sure.
Can we pull it up on a, on a.
On a podcast app, as soon as he finds it.
And then that'll,
that'll say it more eloquently than I possibly so hard to listen to.
And then there's shaken baby syndrome, which we'll be covering on junk science,
which is, which is like, everyone's heard those words. It's a,
it's a ridiculous idea that you can shake a baby hard enough to rattle its
brain without injuring it in any other way. Right.
So we're supposed to believe that a woman who is a mother, right. First of all,
it's hard to believe that they would kill their kid, but okay. Let's, let's,
let's suspend that this belief, how do you get to shake a baby? Right?
You're this, you're a strong guy. Okay.
But let's say you don't have a big muscle mass and you have a baby.
Sometimes they're toddlers. It could be a 15, 20 pound kid.
You're going to hold it out at arms length and shake it. No,
your arms aren't going to do. And by the way, unless I'm mistaken people,
most people, they get mad at something, they don't shake it. They hit it,
they kick it or they throw it right. You get mad at your golf club.
You don't shake it. It hit a bad shot, whatever. I mean, it's, you know,
it's madness.
And yet it's accepted in courts and they're countless people serving time.
You know, uh, Melissa [inaudible] is one. I can't leave her out.
Jon Jones in Ohio innocent as could be just misdiagnosed. Okay.